well Israel has of course closed its
border crossings to the Gaza Strip that
means there is only one other
theoretical option for Palestinians to
leave Gaza the Rafa border crossing to
Egypt the Egyptian government is in
talks with the US and Israel on allowing
humanitarian Aid to pass through but it
won't open corridors for Palestinians to
leave
Gaza well for more on the role of Egypt
in this crisis I want to bring in Seth
he's advocacy officer at the think tank
project on Middle East democracy he
joins me from the us tonight Seth it's
good to have you with us um do you see a
scenario in which Egypt would open its
borders to Gaza to allow refugees to
escape yeah thanks for having me um I
think you know one of the lessons we
definitely should take away from uh this
weekend is Never Say Never uh as you
were saying the the preference I think
of the Egyptian government government is
to not allow
refugees uh to to come into Egypt uh and
instead to allow humanitarian assistance
to flow into Gaza in the ways that they
have done uh in in previous uh sort of
escalations uh of violence like we're
seeing now um at the same time I also
would say you know this is not uh unique
to Gaza uh Egypt is not necess
necessarily wanted uh refugees coming
from Sudan down in its Southern
border to its West uh and so I think
it's a bit of a pattern uh in terms of
Egypt and and you know in their defense
uh to a degree they themselves are
suffering uh severe economic crisis uh
inflation is at its highest levels uh
unsustainable debt and so it's a real
difficult time to uh be in Egypt uh and
so having having a burden of refugees
flowing in is something that would uh
you know be quite difficult is this
though just about economics I mean when
we look at Hamas in um in Gaza we could
imagine that if the Rafa gate were to be
open and you had this flood of
Palestinians into Egypt um the
government in Egypt could be concerned
about the Muslim Brotherhood for example
um increasing its strength in the
country and we know that that is
something that the current President of
Egypt would not stand for I mean there
there are political and ideological
reasons for keeping that gate closed
aren't
there I think you know the Egyptian
government is definitely emphasizing
security concerns uh from Hamas I I
would say on the Muslim Brotherhood
inside the country uh over the past
decade they've essentially been
decimated uh the Brotherhood themselves
for decades at least sort of the the
core group have uh you know distanced
themselves from violence and been
opposed to it you know there's certainly
Splinter groups and so forth uh I I
don't see a real actual threat uh in
terms of that uh at least Brotherhood uh
actions inside Egypt now obviously if
Hamas operatives were escaping that
that's a different scenario but but I
don't think it's it's a a real concern
in terms of the Brotherhood would you
say that Egypt maybe um is telling us
that by opening the border and allowing
Palestinians to enter in mass that that
would harm the Palestinian calls to have
its own
State I think you've seen some uh some
Egyptians emphasize this uh but I think
Palestinians themselves have also
emphasized this uh the right of return
is a major issue for
Palestinians uh from 48 to 67 uh and on
and on we've seen where uh when
Palestinians have left uh Palestine
they've not been able to return and so I
think it's a legitimate concern among
many uh that if they were to leave Gaza
they would not be able to return US
Secretary of St Anthony blinkin um he is
in the Middle East with his team um what
can they achieve in Egypt and I'll put
it in another way is there any chance of
a negotiated settlement which does not
include Egypt
you know I think the secretary and uh is
there now we're seeing the secretary
defense is going to be there tomorrow I
believe uh they're trying to show uh
their steadfast support for Israel uh
that uh they have their back no matter
what and that's sort of what they've
been
emphasizing uh I I think certainly you
know now that he's announced that he's
extending his trip to other countries in
the region uh there's going to be other
priorities uh helping hopefully uh you
know the humanitarian crisis in Gaza um
and doing whatever they can on that
front uh I I think in terms of Egypt we
should expect there to be a role uh
there tends to be one there has been one
uh in in previous uh moments like this
uh but he's also not just going to Egypt
uh he's going to some of these other
countries the region because they also
matter I think one should definitely
look at uh countries like the UAE uh and
others who signed the Abraham Accords
and be expecting and almost calling on
them to be doing more part of the
Abraham Accords uh when it was sold at
least here in the United States was that
these countries would now have more of
an influence with Israel uh and and now
seems to be the time given the
vulnerability of civilians in Gaza so
Seth minder with the project on Middle
East democracy Seth we appreciate your
time and your analysis tonight thank
you thank you well I'm joined Now by
hasham Mahana a Communications officer
with the international Committee of the
Red Cross from Gaza it's good to have
you with us could you just tell us what
are you witnessing and seeing right now
on the ground there in
Gaza first of all thank you for having
me and giving me the opportunity to um
give you a brief about the situation in
Gaza Strip what we can say at the moment
is that we have reached the level of um
catastrophe at all levels um the U
there's a complete blackout across the
Gaza Strip which impact directly the
households or what's left of the
neighborhoods that were not impacted by
the uh facilities and um whatever left
from the infrastructure of the power
water Waste Water Supplies uh it also
impacts um significantly the Health Care
System entirely Gaza um there are a lot
there are a lot of hospitals and Medical
Care Centers who are out child out of
service and the remaining operational
Hospitals now are running only on um
generators run by Fuel
and they are in limited quantities and
are also about to run out um the
Ministry of Health and Gaza issued a
plee saying that um they are running out
they actually ran out of U most items of
the medication medical supplies
equipment and also now patients are
being treated on the floors after their
capacity has been sh uh by
100% um and seam let me ask you let me
ask you about what we're hearing from
the UN the UN says that the number of
people in Gaza who have been displaced
or made homeless that number has
increased inreased by 30% in just the
last 24 hours I mean that is that's an
unbelievable number there are are there
enough accommodations for these people
who have seen their you know Apartments
blown
up first of all Gaza has no shelters as
um you know the world uh understands the
word of shelter they are basically owner
schools and um those who manag to escape
Under Fire actually uh are not all
inside the UN school they uh managed to
reach uh to their beloved ones families
friends uh I'm now seeing as one of my
friends to be you for example um however
those who were instructed to evacuate uh
were instructed to evacuate without
clear instructions to say haven this is
another concern for us entire
neighborhoods got destroyed and in a
matter of a few hours uh entire families
are um you know uh now no longer exist
on the Civil registry uh some of the
famiies are still under the r of their
own households the civil defense could
not reach them in time due to the lack
of the acquired supplies equipment and
also because of the lack of you know
safe access yesterday uh the palestin
recr society our humanitarian partner
lost four of their emergency Medical
Teams while they were on their way to
conduct that humanitarian Mission
risking lives they lost they literally
lost their Liv there and we have condemn
the act of attacking you know the
medical missions in in in in anywhere in
any place and in any context this is
completely unacceptable and against the
international humanitarian law
principles uh we have been existing in
this uh delegation in Israel and the
occupied territory since
1967 and we have never witnessed this
level of uh you know spering violence
conducting facilities targeting the
civilian
populations attack against you know the
medical missions J including journalists
one of the icrc of residents was
partially damaged as it was located in
one of the heavily bombardment bombarded
neighborhoods in the heart of the Gaza
City yeah uh this is also hampering you
know the the activity of the
humanitarian missions in Gaza and we are
andc have been in constant dialogue with
both you know parties to the conflict to
ensure the safe access of the Medical
Teams the humanitarian teams as well as
to protect you know to protect the
civilians and properties hasham let me
just ask you um also about the Rafa
Crossing that is the crossing the only
gate um out to get out of Gaza that
leads to Egypt um that gate is now
closed we've been hearing though that
it's being used to get humanitarian Aid
into Gaza um can you confirm that I mean
how are you getting medical supplies or
food or or the things that are needed
how are they being brought into Gaza
right
now yes um The rer Crossing is the only
um Gates remaining open to Gaza STP
however it's it's not accessible for any
medical missions or humanitarian
missions any like so far as announced uh
it was directly targeted uh um um a few
days like two days ago um we any efforts
that would eventually lead to the entry
of humanitarian Aid into Gaza strap that
includes uh medicine food and fuel
enough enough to run uh you know the
soul G of our parents and also to help
the humanitarian teens and the doctors
and nurses and at hospitals continue
saving lives let me just let me be let
me be careful else let me be clear about
this so you're not getting anything from
outside through um through that gate or
anywhere right now in Gaza so you're
saying nothing is coming into the Gaza
Strip at this moment at all in terms of
humanitarian
Aid as of this moment absolutely nothing
has entered uh into the Gaza Strip
unfortunately okay and are you seeing
what we're hearing reports that food and
water have begun running out in
neighborhoods are you seeing
that yes I'm actually witht like I see
myself uh some some families trying to
reach uh you know the accessible shops
pharmacies or bakeries to get food
medicine and drinking water um these uh
you know supplies are running out of the
stores and there is no you know Supply
to accumulate or to you know um to cover
the Gap uh there is a food crisis in G
because you know um egg is not available
in the market uh crops are not available
in the market we are supposed to be in
the middle of the alive harvest season
which is an annual celebration and this
is also another you know poast of the
asaran consequence so we are about to
witness also an environmental crisis due
to the absence of you know um moretime
waste water pump stations to be seen
operational we are witnessing actually a
humanitarian crisis at all level but on
top of that we are witnessing a crisis
of Hope andam unfortunately we're out of
time but I appreciate you taking the
time to talk with us it's important to
get this story out to Sham Mahana
communic officer with the international
Committee of the Red Cross in Gaza thank
you